[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today,
we're going to continue looking at on
sequences. This is our attempt to slowly focus
on so-called infinite sequences but in a more
careful and precise way than you're going to
find anywhere else. The notion of a sequence,
especially an infinite sequence, is not
a god-given one. It's not one that we
are born to understand; it does not drop
into our laps. We need to work to build
up such a notion, and we must be very
careful not to fall into certain traps.
Last time, we talked about poly number
on sequences, where we start with a poly
number or a polynomial—for example, P =
1 + alpha + 2 alpha cubed—and from that,
we can generate a so-called poly number on
sequence. I remind you, this is the notation
that we used: we used a square left bracket and
a pointed right bracket. We use the letter n,
so we replace the alpha in the poly
number with the letter n, and that,
for us, signifies a poly number on sequence. This
particular sequence represents the numbers 4, 19,
58, 133, 256, and so on—just the values that we
obtain by replacing the n here with, first of all,
1, and then 2, and then 3, and then 4, and
as many as you have patience for calculating.
So, in particular, this included the special case
of constant on sequences, which we can think of
just as a special case when our poly number
reduces to an ordinary integer—for example,
5 is the sequence 5, 5, 5, and so on. We had
an explicit convention for picking out the
k-th element of such a sequence. We agreed that
this notation here means that the k-th element
of the on sequence P(n) is, by definition,
P(k)—what you get when you replace the n
with a particular natural number k. So, for
example, in this case here, the third element
is what you get when you replace the n here with
3. You get 1 + 3 + 2 * 27, which I think is 58.
Alright, so we've got a modest beginning now
to studying on sequences. We'd like to now
think about how we go further—how do we extend
this to more general on sequences? For example,
some of the many, many sequences found in
Sloane's Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences.
A tempting idea is to try to consider
more general ways of generating on
sequences by going from poly numbers to more
general kinds of expressions. For example,
we could try to consider expressions built up
from the letter n by not just the arithmetical
operations of multiplication, addition, and
subtraction, but also by using exponentiation.
So, for example, let me just remind you what
we mean by exponentiation. So, 2 cubed—another
notation for that is 2 to the 3—just means
exponentiation, and what it means is 2 * 2 * 2;
we're multiplying together three copies of
2 to get 8. Similarly, 4 to the 5th, also
written 4 with the hat 5, is 4 * 4 * 4 * 4 * 4—all
together five 4s—and that turns out to be 1024.
Alright, so what we're going to think about
doing, perhaps, is to enlarge our expressions to
move from poly numbers to some more complicated
kinds of expressions where we allow ourselves
to use exponentiation as well as addition,
multiplication, and subtraction. For example,
we might consider expressions like this where
we have alpha to the alpha + 3, 1 + alpha to
the 2 + alpha squared. You can easily imagine
building up a lot more complicated things by
combining addition, multiplication, subtraction,
and also this exponentiation—you could have,
of course, repeated exponentiation, the
exponent of the exponent of the exponent, etc.
So maybe this could be the basis for defining a
new kind of object called an exponion sequence.
Maybe that's a reasonable kind of terminology
to go up from poly numbers. So, for example,
associated with this object, we could
consider the sequence, the on sequence E(n),
where we replace the alphas with ns, and
then this expression is to be thought of
as something that's generating integers. The
first one obtained by replacing the n with a
1—that'll be 1; 1 + 3 * 1 + 1 will be 2;
and 2 + 1 + 2 would be 3. So altogether,
this would be 1 + 3 * 2 cubed—2 cubed is 8; 3 *
2 cubed is 24; add 1, we would get 25. The next
element in the sequence would be what you get
when you replace the n with a 2—in this case,
2191, and then n with a 3, in which case you
get 12,582, then 39, and kind of obviously,
as n starts to increase, it doesn't take long
for these numbers to get pretty big because
we've got exponents here, and exponents
get bigger than just ordinary products.
So this is certainly a tempting direction
to go—it's tempting. The question is,
does this actually work? This is an idea, but
can we actually pin it down logically? It turns
out that this is not at all as easy as it might
appear from the outside. But before we consider
various problems with the idea, let's have a
look at some examples. Let's look in Sloane's
Online Encyclopedia and see if we can find
some sequences that fall into this category,
and it's not too hard to do that. Here's
a sort of a random selection that I found.
So, the 42nd element in his encyclopedia is
this sequence here—the numbers 1, 11, 111,
1111, and so on, just made by strings of ones in
decimal notation. And it's not too hard to see
that there's a formula for the nth one: (10^n - 1)
/ 9. So, for example, the first one would be 10^1,
which is 10, - 1 / 9, which is 9; divided by
9, which is 1. The second one is 100 - 1 / 9,
which is 99 / 9, which is 11, and so on. So
this is sort of in the direction of what we're
talking about—it's basically an expression
built up by also having an exponentiation,
the n appearing as an exponent of an
expression. Of course, it also has
some rational number arithmetic involved
because we're actually dividing by nine.
Here's another sequence, which is the powers
of 2 + 1—so 2, 3, 5, 9, 17, 33, and so on—given
by the expression 2^n + 1. Now, in Sloane's
encyclopedia, sequences often start with n = 0
rather than the n = 1 that we're generally working
with—that's merely a convention. So, for Sloane,
the number that would be written here first
when we display this sequence would be 2^0 + 1,
which is 1 + 1, which is 2. So I've put that into
brackets just to indicate that we're actually
starting our sequences with n = 1, the powers of
2—that's number 79 in the sequence. And a more
complicated one, the n^n sequence—1^1, 2^2,
3^3, 4^4, 5^5, and so on—that's number 312.
Alright, so we've got some examples
of such exponion sequences. Can we
do arithmetic with them? It's
not too hard to see that yes,
we probably could. For example, if we have
the exponion E, which is alpha to the alpha,
and we also consider the exponion F, which might
be 2 * (1 + alpha)^3 + alpha, then we could,
say, add these two to get that exponion. We
can also multiply them to get that exponion,
and we could do something that we generally
can't do with just poly numbers—we could raise
one of these to the other. So we could consider
something like E to the F—that would be alpha
to the alpha to the power F, which is up there.
Or, equivalently, we could look at F to the E.
So there are various possibilities here, and
it certainly suggests that maybe there's a kind
of arithmetic with these exponions. But the
question is still, does this actually work?
Well, let's have a look at some possible
problems that can arise, that will certainly
arise. The first one is that negative exponents
generally reflect the operation of division,
and division is a little bit more complicated
than the other three operations. For one thing,
because of the possibility that you might be
dividing by zero, which is officially not allowed.
So, for example, consider this example
here. If E is 4 - alpha^3 - alpha,
here we're allowing integer coefficients, and here
would be the corresponding exponion sequence E(n),
just obtained from this one by replacing
the alpha with the n. Then what would
be the sequence that we would want to
associate with this expression? Well,
if n = 1, then we would get 3^2, which
would be 9—that's fine. Then, when n = 2,
we would get 2^1, which is 2. Then, when n
= 3, we would get 1^0—1^0 is still alright,
can be interpreted as 1. And then the next one
would be 4 - 4—that's 0^3 - 4, which would be
-1. So we would have 0^-1, and something to
the -1 is usually interpreted as 1 over that
thing. So we're really talking about 1/0 here,
which is problematic with standard arithmetic.
So that's one kind of problem that we can
expect to have to deal with with this more
general kind of object. Another sort of related
issue is that if we want to extend the values to
rational numbers, which ultimately we do,
then fractional exponents are undefined.
For example, if we want to work, say, with
the exponion 1 + alpha^(alpha/3), which is
just a small departure from what we're talking
about, where we're replacing a coefficient,
which is an integer here, with a
coefficient which is a rational number,
the associated exponion sequence would be
this thing here. But then the presence of
this 3 in this exponent here means that we
have fractional exponents. So when we want
to evaluate this thing, say, at 1, we would get
1 + 1^(1/3)—that's 2^(1/3). Well, in our system,
we're only working with rational numbers so
far—we don't have a cubed root of 2. We've
talked about the problematic aspect of things
like that. The next entry is going to be 3^(2/3),
the next entry when n = 3 will be 4 to the 1—that
happens to be alright. But we can kind of expect
that most of the terms in the sequence
will be problematic for us arithmetically.
That's another kind of issue that we're
going to have to deal with if we want to
work with these exponions in a kind of a
general fashion. Those previous problems
that we mentioned—we might be able to get
around those by suitably restricting our
arithmetic. However, this third problem is
a much deeper one and is a serious obstacle
to developing a theory of exponions:
the non-uniqueness of representation.
Let me give you an example or two. Consider this
exponion—it's an expression involving our variable
alpha, and it's 1 + alpha * (1 + alpha)^(alpha^2).
Now, if we want the ordinary laws of arithmetic
to be valid, this should be the same as (1 +
alpha)^(1 + alpha^2) because the bases here are
the same, so the exponents add—this is really to
the exponent 1. So we would certainly want this
to be a legitimate equation. But then the question
is, alright, well, what's going to be the official
name or the official expression for this exponion?
Is it going to be the left-hand side, or is it
going to be the right-hand side, or is it going to
be something different which is still equal to it?
Here's another slightly more subtle example.
Consider (1 - alpha)^2 * (1 - alpha)^(2alpha).
Well, this could be rewritten as (1
+ alpha) * (1 - alpha)^(1 + 2alpha).
That's a little bit more subtle.
What I'm doing there is realizing
that I can factor (1 - alpha)^2
as (1 - alpha) * (1 + alpha),
and I could take the 1 - alpha from here and
sort of group it with these 1 - alphas, raising
the exponent by 1 and leaving this. It's the same
kind of idea, but just a little bit more subtle.
To go up in subtlety a little bit more,
here's (1 + alpha)^(alpha^2) * (1 + alpha)^3 * (1
+ alpha)^5. Well, I claim that can be rewritten
like this. It might not be entirely obvious why
that is, but it turns out that (1 + alpha)^3 has
(1 + alpha) as a factor, and here's the other
factor. And (1 + alpha)^5 has (1 + alpha) also
as a factor, and here's the other factor. So if
I take the (1 + alpha) from this term and bring
it here, and I take the (1 + alpha) from this term
and bring it here, then the total exponent up here
becomes alpha^2 from here + 2alpha + 1, and it
turns out that alpha^2 + 2alpha + 1 is exactly
1 + alpha^2. So it's a kind of rewriting using
basic laws of algebra, but it's starting to become
obvious that it may not be entirely clear how to
go from one of these to an equivalent expression.
I could probably cook up more complicated examples
using more subtle and sneaky reformulations that
make it quite challenging how to go from the
beginning to the end step. And so the problem is,
well, if you have these various possible forms for
an exponion, which one are you going to choose?
Here's an even simpler example, I suppose.
If we consider alpha^(alpha^alpha) written
with the brackets this way, then the laws of
exponentiation suggest that this should be
the same as alpha^(alpha^2). Okay, fair enough.
But now which of these is going to be preferred?
You see, when we were working with poly
numbers, this did not come up because
a poly number was defined in a very primitive
way—it was just ultimately a list of integers,
the integers being the coefficients of the
various powers of alpha. And at the end of
the day, you can take any polynomial or poly
number expression and reduce it to a sort of
standard form, so there's never ultimately
an argument about what the ultimate standard
form for a poly number is. But with exponions,
this is far from the case. So if you're going
to develop a computer program to deal with
exponions, then your computer program will
have to be very sophisticated because it will
have to be able to distinguish between these
various forms and be able to tell whether
two expressions are, in fact, equal or not.
So is there a canonical form for an exponion?
Is there some kind of algorithm that detects
equality or inequality? Well, I don't really
know good answers for these questions.
I think they're interesting questions;
they're not necessarily insurmountable,
but there is certainly some work to be done before
we can establish a proper theory of exponions and,
therefore, a proper theory of exponion sequences.
That's just the reality of it—work has to be done,
and that work has to be done before we're
really entitled to talk meaningfully
about extending our ideas of on
sequences to this broader arena.
Alright, let's change gears a little bit and
consider another broad direction that we could
go in to enlarge our family of on sequences.
Let's introduce the idea of recursive sequences
or recursive on sequences, and we'll do so
in an informal way at first because we don't
really have a proper definition of these
things, just like we don't really have a
proper definition of an exponion sequence yet.
But we can still start to talk about the ideas.
Alright, let's start with some examples. Here
are some well-known on sequences of this kind
that you'll probably be very familiar with. The
Fibonacci numbers are the most prominent—they're
given by the sequence 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, where
every element is the sum of the two previous
ones. We also have to say that the initial
elements, which Sloane starts with 0 and 1,
are themselves 0 and 1. After that, the recursive
formula Fn = F(n-1) + F(n-2) describes how we can
get any further element from knowing the previous
two, so we can recursively generate more and more
terms in this sequence. So these are called the
initial conditions, and this is the recursive
formula, and this is sort of typical for
a recursive sequence—these two aspects.
Of course, the Fibonacci numbers, going back
to Leonardo of Pisa, traveled through Europe
and promoted the Arabic-Hindu number system as
well. A more modern variant of this sequence
is the Lucas numbers, which are generated by
the same recursive formula but have slightly
different initial conditions, starting with 1
and 3. So now I'm starting with 1 and 2 as the
first two elements, so we have 1, 3, and then
the next one is 4, and the next one is 7, 11,
18, 29, and so on. There's a slight variant
of these where the sequence starts with a 2
and then has a 1 and a 3—that's number 32 in
Sloane's encyclopedia; this is 204. So these
Lucas numbers have important number theoretical
properties—there are many intimate connections
between them and the Fibonacci numbers, and
they're rather important for primality testing.
So these are two very standard, well-known
examples of recursive sequences. So if we widen
our view to include these recursively defined
sequences, then we get a lot more sequences that
are appearing in the online encyclopedia—we
get a lot of interesting sequences.
Here's another one, number 58,
the sequence 2, 3, 7, 43, 1807,
and then 3,263,000, and so on. Probably
the pattern is not very obvious from that,
but here is a description of it as a
recursive sequence. The first term is 2,
and the (n + 1)th term can be calculated
from the nth term by doing the following:
we take the nth term and square it—that's the
exponent there—subtract the nth term, and add
1. So, for example, a(0) is 2, so what would a(1)
be? Well, if we plug in n = 0 here, we would get
a(1) = a(0)^2—that's 4—minus a(0), which would be
2 + 1, which is 3. And then the next one would be
3^2 - 3 + 1, so that's 9 - 3 + 1, that's 7. And
then 7^2 - 7 + 1 is 43, and so on. These numbers
are called Euclid numbers or sometimes Sylvester's
sequence, and they come up in a variety of ways.
One very interesting way is the expression of
1 in terms of Egyptian fractions. The Egyptians
worked with fractions, but they were rather
fussy about the kinds of fractions that they
liked—they only liked fractions with 1 in
the numerator, so 1/2, 1/3, 1/7, these were
all fractions they were comfortable with, but
something like 2/3 or 5/7 they didn't like. So
the Egyptians tried to express numbers by writing
them as sums of these simple Egyptian fractions,
and there's generally lots of different
ways of writing a given number that way.
So, if you try to write 1 as a sum of Egyptian
fractions, one way of doing that would be to sort
of take the biggest Egyptian fraction that will
fit inside 1—let's say that that's 1/2 because
we won't include 1/1. So then, if we take 1/2 away
from 1, then what's remaining has a certain size,
and if we look at the biggest Egyptian fraction
that we can take away from that, that's 1/3. So if
we take that away and then ask, well, what's the
biggest Egyptian fraction that we can take away
from what's left? That turns out to be 1/7. And so
the Egyptian fractions that you get by trying to
write 1 as a sum are just those with denominators
corresponding to these Euclid numbers.
Now, there's a very different recursive
formula for this sequence, which is that
a(n) = a(0) * a(1) * a(2) * ... * a(n-1) + 1.
So, for example, a(1) is equal to 2 + 1, and a(2)
is equal to 2 * 3 + 1, while 43 is equal to 2
* 3 * 7 + 1, and 1807 is 2 * 3 * 7 * 43 + 1.
So there's an important lesson here: a rather
surprising thing is that recursive descriptions
of an on sequence may not at all be unique. In
fact, they may be quite wildly different. Who
would have guessed that this recursive formula and
this recursive formula generate the same sequence?
Let's have a look at two sequences that we've
already talked about from the point of view
of recursive definitions of them. So, here was
the sequence n^2 - 1, which I associated with
this hopping frogs and toads problem—the
numbers which are 1 less than the square,
so 0, 3, 8, 15, 24, and so on. This turns
out to also have a recursive definition:
a single initial condition of a(0) = 0, and then
the condition that a(n) = a(n-1) + 2n + 1. So,
for example, that's number 0, that's number
1, that's number 2, that's number 3. So,
for example, a(3) will be a(2)
+ 2 * 3 + 1, so 15 is 8 + 6 + 1.
The famous Catalan number sequence that we've
talked about—1, 1, 2, 5, 14, 42, 132, 429, 1430,
and so on—also has recursive formulas, but more
than just one. So, for example, if we start with
c(0) = 1, then here is one kind of recursive
formula. What's the meaning of this? Well,
the meaning is that let's say we want to calculate
what follows after 5. To calculate this one,
what we do is we multiply 1 * 5—that's 5—1 *
2—that's 2—2 * 1—that's another 2—and 5 * 1,
and we add those all together. So, 5 + 2 + 2 +
5 is a total of 14. So 42, for example, is 14 +
5 + 4 + 5 + another 14—28
+ 10 is 38 + the 4 is 42.
A quite different recursive formula is that
c(n) is actually just a multiple of c(n-1).
It's 2 * (2n - 1) / (n + 1). So, again, 14, which
is 0, 1, 2, 3, 4—it's the fourth one. So c(4),
according to this formula, should be
c(3), which is 5, and what you have
to do is multiply by 2 * (2n - 1), so 2 * 8 -
1—that's 2 * 7, and we have to divide by 4 + 1,
which is 5. So we have to take 5, multiply by
2 * 7, and divide by 5—that's just 2 * 7 or 14.
So the recursive formulas are quite of a
different nature. Here, we're multiplying by,
well, actually a rational function—a poly number
divided by another poly number, so it's a bit
more complicated arithmetically. This one is
somewhat simpler, but you have to multiply a
lot of pairs of these existing ones. So you need
to know the whole sequence up to the point to do
the recursion—in this case, you only need to
know the last one to generate the next one.
And there are other formulas for other recursive
formulas for the Catalan numbers too, of course.
So various difficulties have surfaced with the
idea of trying to define recursive sequences and
to try to set up a theory for them. So amongst
these difficulties are, first of all, what kinds
of recursive formulas are we going to allow?
The ones I've included are relatively simple,
but you need to be able to set boundaries
to what kinds of formulas you're going
to consider. Are we going to allow recursive
formulas that are very wordy—ones that involve
maybe physical phenomena? The same kinds
of problems that we have in defining what
exactly a function is surface here—what kinds
of formulas are we actually going to allow?
How do we tell when two different-looking
recursive formulas are the same? In other words,
they generate what we would like to think are the
same sequences—is there some
systematic way of doing that?
How do we implement or specify
such on sequences on a computer?
Right, there's a very large range
of possible recursive formulas—how
are we going to fit them all into some nice
little program that deals with these things?
How are we going to do arithmetic with
recursive on sequences? For example,
if we take two of the on sequences that I've
mentioned to you, and you have a recursive
formula for one and you have a recursive formula
for the other, suppose you add the two sequences.
You're generating a new sequence—is that new
sequence also a recursive sequence? If so,
how do you describe it recursively? Is there some
way of going from the recursive formula of the two
starting sequences to a recursive formula for the
sum? Or also the product? Or the difference, etc.?
That's a very knotty problem, and it's not at
all easy to answer, and it might only be possible
to answer it if we restrict ourselves to rather
special or simple kinds of recursive on sequences.
So we might only be able to set up
this theory by restricting ourselves
to rather simple kinds of recursive
formulas, at least to begin with.
This is an example of the difference between
this course and what you find out in the modern
mathematical world these days. If you're a
student of mathematics at most universities,
you will never be told that there is anything
particularly problematic with the term "recursive
sequence." You're just shown a few examples and
given some hand-waving description of, "Well,
a recursive sequence is one in which every
term is generated from the previous ones."
I hope you're starting to appreciate
how imprecise and vague that really
is. Sure, you can give a few examples, but
what you really want to do is you want to
set boundaries—you want to make it very
clear not just what a few examples are,
but what the examples are that fall outside
your realm and where the boundary is between
what you're considering and the things that
you do not want to consider in your definition.
This is much more work than just saying a few
words and giving a few simple-minded examples.
Okay, so setting up sequences is a lot more work
than is generally admitted, and it's work that
we're willing to at least contemplate, right?
Because our job is to do mathematics correctly.
So next time, what we're going to do is we're
going to be more modest again. We're going
to start in a simple kind of way. We are
going to extend our notion of on sequences,
but in a somewhat different direction—a direction
which we can nail down very precisely and which
is very important for us. We're going to
start considering sequences with rational
values—so sequences of rational numbers, not
just integers. That's going to be crucial for
doing calculus and analysis, and our main
tool there is the extension of going from
poly numbers to rational poly numbers, where
we divide one poly number by another. That's
another rung up the ladder toward a theory of
sequences, and we'll be able to also introduce
the very important idea of a limit, of course,
without any reference to so-called real numbers.
So I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]